README.md, before:

# LinuxServerConfigForAWS
Configuration steps to configure a Ubuntu server and deploy a flusk app on on AWS Lightsail.

## Server Details
Public IP: 52.65.144.252  
SSH port : 2200  

## Table of Contents
- [Create an instance of Ubuntu server Lightsail](#create-an-instance-of-ubuntu-server-lightsail)
- [Setting Up Your SSH Key Pair](#setting-up-your-ssh-key-pair)
- [Change Default SSH Port From 22 to 2200](#change-default-ssh-port-from-22-to-2200)
- [Setting Up Uncomplicated Firewall](#setting-up-uncomplicated-firewall)

- [Setting Up Graders SSH Key Pair](#setting-up-graders-ssh-key-pair)
- [Enforcing SSH Key Login](#enforcing-ssh-key-login)

- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Author](#author)

## Create an instance of Ubuntu server Lightsail
1. Go to AWS Management Console.
2. Select Lightsail from `All services/Compute/Lightsail`  
After selecting Lightsail you are redirected to Create instance page.
3. Select Instance Location - Optional as this is tutorial project
4. Pick your instance image `Linux/Unix`
5. Select a blueprint `OS Only`
6. Select `Ubuntu 16.04 LTS` as an operating system.
7. Choose a cheapest plan available.
8. Name your instance - Optional.  
I went for generic name.

## Setting Up Your SSH Key Pair
1. Visit your AWS Management Cpnsole then `Compute/Lightsail`
2. Select Account in right hand corner.
3. When redirected to your account page of Lightsail choose SSH Keys tab.
4. Hit Download button for your location of the instance.  
file will be named like `LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam`
>NOTE:
>- Keep this file secure as this is your keys to the server.
5. Navigate to the directory where you placed your `LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam` and rename it for ease of use   
`mv LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam lightsail-ssh-key.rsa`
6. Change access mode to the file `chmod 600 lightsail-ssh-key.rsa`
7. Connect to your server from your terminal  
`$ ssh -i lightsail-ssh-key.rsa ubuntu@52.65.144.252`.

## Change Default SSH Port From 22 to 2200
>WARNING:
> Because AWS has its own fire wall setup you may be locked out. So in your
> browser open the instance of Ubunt. Hit Networking tab. Then in Firewall
> section hit `+ Add another` rule button.  
> 
>| Application  |  Protocol  |  Port Range  |
>| :---        | :---     | :---        | 
>| Custom      | TCP      | 2200        |

1. Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file by `$ sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`  
2. Edit line with `Port 22` to `Port 2200`  
3. Save the change by Ctrl + X and exit from nano with Y  
4. Restart SSH with `$ sudo service ssh restart`  

>NOTE:
>While we are at it we can disable ssh login as root user. As, by default AWS Ubuntu is
>instanciated with `PermitRootLogin prohibit-password`. So we'll change that to
>`PermitRootLogin no`

Now you should be able to login with  
`$ ssh -i lightsail-ssh-key.rsa ubuntu@52.65.144.252 -p 2200`.

## Setting Up Uncomplicated Firewall
Configure Ubuntu internal firewall (UFW) to only allow incoming traffic to  

| Protocol    | Port  | 
| :---        | :---  |  
| SSH         | 2200  | 
| HTTP        | 80    | 
| NTP         | 123   |

`$ sudo ufw status` - Checks the status of firewall. It should be inactive by default.

* Part I - Deny all traffic
1. Deny all incoming traffic - `$ sudo ufw default deny incoming `
2. Deny all outgoing traffic - `$ sudo ufw default deny outgoing`

* Part II - Allow Only Specific Ports
1. Allow incoming ssh on port 2200 - `$ sudo ufw allow 2200/tcp`
2. Allow HTTP on port 80 - `$ sudo ufw allow 80/tcp`
3. Allow NTP on port 123 - `$ sudo ufw allow 123/udp`

* Part III - Enable The Firewall
1. Enable the firewall - `sudo ufw enable`
2. Check firewall rules - `sudo ufw status`

## Creating New User "Grader"
`$ sudo apt-get install finger` - for later use to check if user was created correctly.  
`$ sudo adduser grader` - Adds new user to the system.

## Give grader sudo access
1. On AWS Ubuntu instance run `$ sudo ls -al /etc/sudoers.d` this will list file/s that contains a list of users who have `sudo` privileges. By default it called `90-cloud-init-users`

2. `sudo cp /etc/sudoers.d/90-cloud-init-users /etc/sudoers.d/grader`
3. `sudo visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/grader`  
Edit the file and leave only 1 line `grader ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL`  
4. `ctrl + x` - to save and `Y` to exit.  
Now your grader should have `sudo` access to Ubuntu instance.

## Setting Up Graders SSH Key Pair
On your local Linux system run `$ ssh-keygen`  
The dialog will ask you to name the file. I named mine `grader-ssh-key.rsa`  
Leave passphrase empty as we are not going to use it.  
Your system will generate 2 files 
1. `grader-ssh-key.pub` - This is your public key. This will go to AWS ububnu instance.
2. `grader-ssh-key` - This is your private key, so keep it secret.

On your AWS ubuntu instance:  
1. Create `/home/grader/.ssh` folder by `$ sudo mkdir /home/grader/.ssh`  
2. Create file with graders ssh public key by `$ sudo nano /home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`  
3. Copy content of `grader-ssh-key.pub` into `/home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`
4. `ctrl + x` - to exit and press Y to save.
5. Change mode of .ssh directory - `$ sudo chmod 700 /home/grader/.ssh`
6. Change mdoe of authorized_keys file - `$ sudo chmod 644 /home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`
7. Finally transfer the ownership of the .ssh directory from root to grader: `$ sudo chown -R grader:grader /home/grader/.ssh` - Recursivly changes ownership of the .ssh directory and it's content.
8. Open another terminal and try to connect to AWS ubuntu instance as a grader by:  
`$ ssh -i grader-ssh-key.rsa grader@52.65.144.252 -p 2200`

## Enforcing SSH Key Login
By default AWS supplies Ubuntu instance with password login off. But, it is always good to check.  
So, run `$ sudo cat /etc/ssh/sshd_config` and look for `PasswordAuthorization no` if it is set to `no` go to [Update all packages](#update-all-packages) section.  
If PasswordAuthorization is set to yes:
1. Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file by `$ sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`  
2. Find line with `PasswordAuthorization yes` and change it to `PasswordAuthorization no`
3. Save the change by Ctrl + X and exit from nano with Y  
4. Restart SSH with `$ sudo service ssh restart`  

## Install Git
1. `$ sudo apt-get install git` - Installs git.
2. `$ git config --global user.name <username>` - Configure your username.
3. `$ git config --global user.email <email>` - Configure your email.
4. `$ git congin --list` - to check your git configuration.

## Install Apache 2 Server and mod_wsgi
1. `$ sudo apt-get install apache2`
2. `$ sudo apt-get install libapache2-mod-wsgi python-dev` - Installs `mod_wsgi` libraries that enables Apache to serve Flask applications. 
3. `$ sudo a2enmod wsgi` - Enable mod_wsgi.
4. `$ sudo service apache2 start` - Start the Apache2 server.

## Install Your Project

## Update all packages
Run 
1. `$ sudo apt-get update` and once this completes
2. `$ sudo apt-get upgrade`  
to get latest packages for your Ubuntu.

## Restart the server
1. Run `sudo service apache2 restart` - this restarts the server
2. Check your app at http://52.65.144.252/

## Contributing
This is a tutorial report. Please consider other projects.

## Author
Alexander Frolov

## References
[How To Set Up SSH Keys on Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-on-ubuntu-1604)  
[Udacity, Generating Key Pairs](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd004/parts/b2de4bd4-ef07-45b1-9f49-0e51e8f1336e/modules/56cf3482-b006-455c-8acd-26b37b6458d2/lessons/4331066009/concepts/48010894770923)

Commit message:

Added clone your project section.

README.md, after:

# LinuxServerConfigForAWS
Configuration steps to configure a Ubuntu server and deploy a flusk app on on AWS Lightsail.

## Server Details
Public IP: 52.65.144.252  
SSH port : 2200  

## Table of Contents
- [Create an instance of Ubuntu server Lightsail](#create-an-instance-of-ubuntu-server-lightsail)
- [Setting Up Your SSH Key Pair](#setting-up-your-ssh-key-pair)
- [Change Default SSH Port From 22 to 2200](#change-default-ssh-port-from-22-to-2200)
- [Setting Up Uncomplicated Firewall](#setting-up-uncomplicated-firewall)

- [Setting Up Graders SSH Key Pair](#setting-up-graders-ssh-key-pair)
- [Enforcing SSH Key Login](#enforcing-ssh-key-login)

- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Author](#author)

## Create an instance of Ubuntu server Lightsail
1. Go to AWS Management Console.
2. Select Lightsail from `All services/Compute/Lightsail`  
After selecting Lightsail you are redirected to Create instance page.
3. Select Instance Location - Optional as this is tutorial project
4. Pick your instance image `Linux/Unix`
5. Select a blueprint `OS Only`
6. Select `Ubuntu 16.04 LTS` as an operating system.
7. Choose a cheapest plan available.
8. Name your instance - Optional.  
I went for generic name.

## Setting Up Your SSH Key Pair
1. Visit your AWS Management Cpnsole then `Compute/Lightsail`
2. Select Account in right hand corner.
3. When redirected to your account page of Lightsail choose SSH Keys tab.
4. Hit Download button for your location of the instance.  
file will be named like `LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam`
>NOTE:
>- Keep this file secure as this is your keys to the server.
5. Navigate to the directory where you placed your `LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam` and rename it for ease of use   
`mv LightsailDefaultPrivateKey-<your-resource-location>.pam lightsail-ssh-key.rsa`
6. Change access mode to the file `chmod 600 lightsail-ssh-key.rsa`
7. Connect to your server from your terminal  
`$ ssh -i lightsail-ssh-key.rsa ubuntu@52.65.144.252`.

## Change Default SSH Port From 22 to 2200
>WARNING:
> Because AWS has its own fire wall setup you may be locked out. So in your
> browser open the instance of Ubunt. Hit Networking tab. Then in Firewall
> section hit `+ Add another` rule button.  
> 
>| Application  |  Protocol  |  Port Range  |
>| :---        | :---     | :---        | 
>| Custom      | TCP      | 2200        |

1. Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file by `$ sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`  
2. Edit line with `Port 22` to `Port 2200`  
3. Save the change by Ctrl + X and exit from nano with Y  
4. Restart SSH with `$ sudo service ssh restart`  

>NOTE:
>While we are at it we can disable ssh login as root user. As, by default AWS Ubuntu is
>instanciated with `PermitRootLogin prohibit-password`. So we'll change that to
>`PermitRootLogin no`

Now you should be able to login with  
`$ ssh -i lightsail-ssh-key.rsa ubuntu@52.65.144.252 -p 2200`.

## Setting Up Uncomplicated Firewall
Configure Ubuntu internal firewall (UFW) to only allow incoming traffic to  

| Protocol    | Port  | 
| :---        | :---  |  
| SSH         | 2200  | 
| HTTP        | 80    | 
| NTP         | 123   |

`$ sudo ufw status` - Checks the status of firewall. It should be inactive by default.

* Part I - Deny all traffic
1. Deny all incoming traffic - `$ sudo ufw default deny incoming `
2. Deny all outgoing traffic - `$ sudo ufw default deny outgoing`

* Part II - Allow Only Specific Ports
1. Allow incoming ssh on port 2200 - `$ sudo ufw allow 2200/tcp`
2. Allow HTTP on port 80 - `$ sudo ufw allow 80/tcp`
3. Allow NTP on port 123 - `$ sudo ufw allow 123/udp`

* Part III - Enable The Firewall
1. Enable the firewall - `sudo ufw enable`
2. Check firewall rules - `sudo ufw status`

## Creating New User "Grader"
`$ sudo apt-get install finger` - for later use to check if user was created correctly.  
`$ sudo adduser grader` - Adds new user to the system.

## Give grader sudo access
1. On AWS Ubuntu instance run `$ sudo ls -al /etc/sudoers.d` this will list file/s that contains a list of users who have `sudo` privileges. By default it called `90-cloud-init-users`

2. `sudo cp /etc/sudoers.d/90-cloud-init-users /etc/sudoers.d/grader`
3. `sudo visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/grader`  
Edit the file and leave only 1 line `grader ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL`  
4. `ctrl + x` - to save and `Y` to exit.  
Now your grader should have `sudo` access to Ubuntu instance.

## Setting Up Graders SSH Key Pair
On your local Linux system run `$ ssh-keygen`  
The dialog will ask you to name the file. I named mine `grader-ssh-key.rsa`  
Leave passphrase empty as we are not going to use it.  
Your system will generate 2 files 
1. `grader-ssh-key.pub` - This is your public key. This will go to AWS ububnu instance.
2. `grader-ssh-key` - This is your private key, so keep it secret.

On your AWS ubuntu instance:  
1. Create `/home/grader/.ssh` folder by `$ sudo mkdir /home/grader/.ssh`  
2. Create file with graders ssh public key by `$ sudo nano /home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`  
3. Copy content of `grader-ssh-key.pub` into `/home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`
4. `ctrl + x` - to exit and press Y to save.
5. Change mode of .ssh directory - `$ sudo chmod 700 /home/grader/.ssh`
6. Change mdoe of authorized_keys file - `$ sudo chmod 644 /home/grader/.ssh/authorized_keys`
7. Finally transfer the ownership of the .ssh directory from root to grader: `$ sudo chown -R grader:grader /home/grader/.ssh` - Recursivly changes ownership of the .ssh directory and it's content.
8. Open another terminal and try to connect to AWS ubuntu instance as a grader by:  
`$ ssh -i grader-ssh-key.rsa grader@52.65.144.252 -p 2200`

## Enforcing SSH Key Login
By default AWS supplies Ubuntu instance with password login off. But, it is always good to check.  
So, run `$ sudo cat /etc/ssh/sshd_config` and look for `PasswordAuthorization no` if it is set to `no` go to [Update all packages](#update-all-packages) section.  
If PasswordAuthorization is set to yes:
1. Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file by `$ sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`  
2. Find line with `PasswordAuthorization yes` and change it to `PasswordAuthorization no`
3. Save the change by Ctrl + X and exit from nano with Y  
4. Restart SSH with `$ sudo service ssh restart`  

## Install Git
1. `$ sudo apt-get install git` - Installs git.
2. `$ git config --global user.name <username>` - Configure your username.
3. `$ git config --global user.email <email>` - Configure your email.
4. `$ git congin --list` - to check your git configuration.

## Install Apache 2 Server and mod_wsgi
1. `$ sudo apt-get install apache2`
2. `$ sudo apt-get install libapache2-mod-wsgi-py3` - Installs `mod_wsgi` libraries for python 3 that enables Apache to serve Flask applications. 
3. `$ sudo a2enmod wsgi` - Enable mod_wsgi.
4. `$ sudo service apache2 start` - Start the Apache2 server.

## Clone Your Project
On AWS Lightsail instance create a folder `/var/www/thecatalog`  
`$ sudo git clone https://github.com/optmzer/catalog-web-app /var/www/thecatalog/thecatalog`  
Now CD to the project folder  
`$ cd /var/www/thecatalog/thecatalog`  
and move thecatalog.wsgi one level up.  
`$ sudo mv thecatalog.wsgi ../thecatalog.wsgi`  
So the folder structure will look like this.  
```
thecatalog\
    thecatalog.wsgi
    thecatalog\ - This is project folder to clone to
    . - The other project files
    .
```

## Update all packages
Run 
1. `$ sudo apt-get update` and once this completes
2. `$ sudo apt-get upgrade`  
to get latest packages for your Ubuntu.

## Restart the server
1. Run `sudo service apache2 restart` - this restarts the server
2. Check your app at http://52.65.144.252/

## Contributing
This is a tutorial report. Please consider other projects.

## Author
Alexander Frolov

## References
[How To Set Up SSH Keys on Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-on-ubuntu-1604)  
[Udacity, Generating Key Pairs](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd004/parts/b2de4bd4-ef07-45b1-9f49-0e51e8f1336e/modules/56cf3482-b006-455c-8acd-26b37b6458d2/lessons/4331066009/concepts/48010894770923)
